Child growth standards This web site presents the WHO Child Growth Standards. These standards were developed using data collected in the WHO Multicentre Growth Reference Study. The site presents documentation on how the physical growth curves and motor milestone windows of achievement were developed as well as application tools to support the implementation of the standards Training course and other tools Overview The Training Course on Child Growth Assessment is a tool for the application of the WHO Child Growth Standards. It is intended primarily for health care providers who measure and assess the growth of children or who supervise these activities. The course is designed for use over 3 1/2 days. It teaches how to measure weight, length and height, how to interpret growth indicators, investigate causes of growth problems and counsel caregivers. Course modules and growth records The WHO child age calculator (a rotating disk mounted on a calendar in PVC material) for calculating child age is part of the course materials that will be made available in WHO Regional Offices when the trainers of trainers workshops are conducted in the respective Regions. Other tools Another set of tools consists of growth charts for boys and girls up to age five (60 completed months): length/height-for-age, weight-for-age, weight-for-length/height, and body mass index-for-age. These charts are complemented by windows of achievement for the following six gross motor milestones: sitting without support, standing with assistance, hands-and-knees crawling, walking with assistance, standing alone, walking alone. The links below permit users to download or view an anthropometry training video. This video describes the MGRS measurement procedures and how to calibrate the measuring equipment. It is available in English, French and Spanish. Anthropometry training video A copy of the video as DVD or VHS (in NTSC or PAL format) can also be ordered from the following email address nutrition@who.int Basic guidelines Global nutrition targets 2025: wasting policy brief The global target for 2025 will be achieved if high burden countries take stock of their current prevalence, projected population growth, underlying causes... Global nutrition targets 2025: breastfeeding policy brief Exclusive breastfeeding – defined as the practice of only giving an infant breast-milk for the first 6 months of life (no other food or water) –... Global nutrition targets 2025: childhood overweight policy brief There has been a dramatic rise in the numbers of children under 5 years of age who are overweight. According to the new 2013 United Nations Children’s... Global nutrition targets 2025: low birth weight policy brief Low birth weight is defined by the World Health Organization (WHO) as weight at birth less than 2500 g (5.5 lb). Low birth weight continues to be a significant... Global nutrition targets 2025: stunting policy brief Childhood stunting is one of the most significant impediments to human development, globally affecting approximately 162 million children under the age... Global nutrition targets 2025: anaemia policy brief Anaemia impairs health and well being in women and increases the risk of maternal and neonatal adverse outcomes. Anaemia affects half a billion women of... Global nutrition targets 2025: policy brief series Recognizing that accelerated global action is needed to address the pervasive and corrosive problem of the double burden of malnutrition, in 2012 the World... Infographics Are We Growing Right?' displays and posters for the WHO Child Growth Standards Posters are available as a set of 5. Other tools Endorsements