Drought and food insecurity in the greater Horn of Africa © WHO / Billy Miaron Millions in the greater Horn of Africa are facing acute hunger as the region faces one of the worst droughts in recent decades, compounded by years of conflict and instability, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and rising food prices due to, in part, the war in Ukraine. As families face severe food insecurity, many have left their homes in search of food and water, and pasture for animals. Large-scale displacement is often accompanied by a deterioration in hygiene and sanitation. Outbreaks of infectious diseases are a major concern, especially when combined with low existing vaccination coverage and health service availability. As people become increasingly food insecure, they also must make the impossible choice between food and healthcare, even as nutritional deficiencies make them increasingly vulnerable to disease. This is particularly true for children, for whom the combination of malnutrition and disease can prove fatal. With malnutrition and displacement, the need for health services will increase as people become weaker and more vulnerable to disease. WHO is coordinating with partners in the health sector and beyond to ramp up its response in the region to avert the worst effects of food insecurity and to give people access to the health services they need. Along with countering the consequences of malnutrition, WHO is helping countries to prepare for outbreaks of diseases like cholera, measles and malaria. This includes improving surveillance systems for communicable diseases to identify and respond to new outbreaks quickly. Among affected populations, WHO helps ensure that essential health services like those for sexual and reproductive health, treatment for chronic infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV, as well as mental health services as people are at high risk of violence and distress can continue without disruption. Publications All →The Greater Horn of Africa (GHoA) is one of the most vulnerable regions to climate change, appearing through erratic rainfall and rising temperatures,... The Greater Horn of Africa (GHoA) region faces severe challenges at the start of 2024, with an estimated 50.1 million people experiencing food insecurity... Snapshot: Greater Horn of Africa food insecurity and health - grade 3 emergency: 31 March2024 The GHoA region accounts for close to 22% of the global humanitarian caseload in 2024. It is one of the most vulnerable regions to climate change. The... Snapshot: Greater Horn of Africa food insecurity and health - grade 3 emergency: 31 January 2024 The Greater Horn of Africa is one of the most vulnerable regions to climate change. The historic four-year drought that hit East Africa caused massive... Situation Report: Greater Horn of Africa Food Insecurity and Health - Grade 3 Emergency — 01 November... Heavy rains induced by El Nino led to extensive flooding in the Horn of Africa, displacing over 4 million people, damaging infrastructure and affecting... Situation Report: Greater Horn of Africa Food Insecurity and Health - Grade 3 Emergency — 1 September... Countries in the Horn are experiencing increased rainfall resulting in flooding and river overflows influenced by El-Niño and a positive Indian... Snapshot: Greater Horn of Africa food insecurity and health - grade 3 emergency: 7 November 2023 The prolonged drought and flooding severely impacted people’s health and deepened a health crisis in the Greater Horn of Africa. The elevated levels... Situation Report: Greater Horn of Africa Food Insecurity and Health - Grade 3 Emergency — 1 July 2023... Countries in the Greater Horn of Africa (GHoA) continue to face extreme weather events including drought and flooding; the impacts of these events are... Snapshot: Greater Horn of Africa food insecurity and health - grade 3 emergency: 31 August 2023 The prolonged drought and flooding severely impacted people’s health and deepened a health crisis in the Greater Horn of Africa. The elevated levels... Situation Report: Greater Horn of Africa Food Insecurity and Health - Grade 3 Emergency — 1 April 2023... Countries in the greater Horn of Africa continued to face extreme weather events including drought and flooding. Flooding from March – May 2023... Snapshot: Greater Horn of Africa food insecurity and health - grade 3 emergency: 12 July 2023 The greater Horn of Africa is facing a dire food insecurity crisis resulting from extreme weather events, along with conflict, the fallout from the COVID-19...