WHO GIS Centre for Health Timely and reliable decisions save lives Geospatial technology in the form of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) enables spatial representation of data to support better public health planning and decision-making. The global health and medical applications of GIS are numerous and many countries currently lack the benefits of GIS to strengthen their health information system. By connecting maps, apps, data and people the WHO GIS Centre is dedicated to support countries and partners to make informed public health decisions faster and to extend the reach of geospatial information across the organization. By continuing to expand its collaboration with partners the WHO GIS Centre aims at bridging inequalities within and across countries. Geospatial data and techniques are also an effective tool to monitor progress and provide a strong basis for policy making to achieve the SDGs and deliver the GPW 13 Triple Billion targets. Story maps See allRationale Dating back to 1854, the seminal work of John Snow illustrates the power of mapping and geographic systems to respond to the cholera outbreak. WHO has an established history of using GIS and mapping to analyze spatial distribution and risk factor patterns, to identify, prevent and control diseases, and to improve the impact of public health interventions. Using GIS to intersect between spatial representation and public health planning enables timely and reliable decisions that can save many lives. To name a few, 15 out of 17 health-related SDGs rely on GIS, for example by monitoring air, water quality and sanitation, neglected tropical diseases (malaria, guinea worm, snake bites), Polio, as well as health emergencies. Many countries currently lack the benefits of GIS to strengthen their health information systems. Expanding its collaboration with partners, the WHO GIS Centre for health aims to make an immediate and lasting public impact. Geospatial solutions for health include advancing the use of GIS in earth observation and remote sensing data for health-related SDGs. It also provides core capacity building for governments, WHO country offices, and technical departments. There is significant scope for every country to leverage the full benefits of GIS. Specific services include: - Supporting geospatial data and analytics to improve compliance and stewardship with WHO Standard Operating Procedures for maps and Web GIS applications; - Increasing the efficient use of GIS by the Member States and partners. Strengthening country data, regional data, analytics, and making the health information system more robust; - Augmenting timely assistance and expertise through a network of UN agencies and trusted geospatial partners; - Promoting a GIS community of practice through providing training and technical expertise in innovative technology. Services offered to countries and partners GIS software hub WHO hosts GIS software (ArcGIS and QGIS) for use by countries, partners and WHO staff. In 2017, WHO signed an Esri Enterprise Agreement to make the ArcGIS software available to WHO staff and provides access to QGIS to all countries and partners. WHO also facilitates the Esri Health and Human Services grant program to provide free software licenses for 2 years to 75 low-and middle-income countries. Satellite imagery support Many of the hardest-to-reach populations live in rural areas lacking detailed maps, thus challenging the health care worker outreach. In this case, satellite imagery becomes a critical tool to rapidly discover remote areas often undetected on the ground. The UN Space Charter provides WHO with unique access to satellite imagery, and WHO supports the processing and delivery of this imagery to countries. Mobile field data collection tools Mobile GIS tools collect location data and improve data quality through rules and semantic integrity. WHO provides tools ( ODK, Kobo and ArcGIS Survey123) and technical assistance to countries and partners. Map standards and services Maps must be produced in compliance with legal standards. WHO provides support to countries and partners with tailored cartographic maps required for fieldwork, analytics, reports and publications in print and digital formats. Geolocated Health Facilities Data initiative Measuring the availability and the physical access to health services is a prerequisite to understand the performance of health systems and their ability to deliver impact. Up-to-date geospatial databases can maximize the strategic and accurate location of health facilities, their accessibility to the population in need, and the supply chain of essential services and medicines. Geospatial datasets Population datasets in relation to geographic boundaries and health facilities are essential for geospatial analytics. For example, this data helps us understand who is living where, various population densities, the number of people in various age groups, urban/rural settings, economic stratification, and other social and demographic characteristics. WHO supports countries and partners in collating the baseline population.