Technical areas of work Partnerships and initiatives Networks and Advisory groups Publication library All →Latest publications Strategic objectives for the development and implementation of maternal, newborn... Essential newborn care course, second edition This material provides the foundation for the essential care of every newborn: immediate care at birth, resuscitation when needed, breast milk feeding,... Selected guidelines and recommendations Maternal and perinatal death and surveillance and response The purpose of the new WHO document “Maternal and Perinatal Death Surveillance and Response (MPDSR): materials to support implementation” is... This up-to-date, comprehensive and consolidated guideline on essential intrapartum care brings together new and existing WHO recommendations that, when... A home-based record is a health document used to record the history of health services received by an individual. It is kept in the household, in either... WHO recommendations on maternal health: guidelines approved by the WHO Guidelines Review Committee Please note that this publication has been updated and can be found at : https://app.magicapp.org/#/guideline/7000 – watch this page for a... This comprehensive WHO guideline provides global, evidence-informed recommendations on routine antenatal care. The guidance aims to capture the complex... Making every baby count Pregnancy is a time of great anticipation for all expectant parents and their families as they envision getting to know and love a healthy baby. The presence... The guidelines focus on postnatal care of mothers and newborns in resource-limited settings in low- and middle-income countries. The critical maternal... Selected implementation guidances Strengthening quality midwifery education for Universal Health Coverage 2030: Framework for action The Framework for Action to Strengthen Midwifery Education is a guide to develop high-quality, sustainable pre- and in-service midwifery education... This standardized system for classifying stillbirths and neonatal deaths, aims to help countries link stillbirths and neonatal deaths to contributing conditions... Much progress has been made during the past two decades in coverage of births in health facilities; however, reductions in maternal and neonatal mortality... Maternal death surveillance and response: technical guidance Most maternal deaths are preventable. In order to end preventable maternal deaths, accurate information on how many women died, where they died and how... Media centre All →Related WHO Teams Contact us Related health topics