The composition of the guideline development group is provisional and will be reviewed and confirmed by the WHO Guidelines Review Committee. The names and brief biographies of the individuals selected to be part of the guideline development group are also being published for public notice and comment. Calls List of members Australian Research Council Future Fellow and Sydney Horizon Fellow, School of Public Health, University of Sydney, Australia Nutritional epidemiologist and Senior Researcher, Department of Epidemiology and Prevention, IRCCS Neuromed, Italy Scientist & Head, Nutrition Information, Communication & Health Education Division, ICMR- National Institute of Nutrition, and Professor, Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, India Programme officer, Corporate Accountability and Public Participation Africa (CAPPA), Nigeria Associate Research Fellow, Korea Institute for Health and Social Affairs, Republic of Korea Executive Director, Kula Vyema Centre of Food Economics, Kenya National Chairperson of the Youth for Mental Health Coalition, and Lead Convenor Healthy Philippines Alliance Youth Network, Philippines Assistant professor, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Iran Professor of Nutrition, American University of Beirut, Lebanon Professor of Population Health, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, UK Professor, Department of Dietetics and Nutrition, University of the Western Cape, South Africa Senior Clinical Lecturer, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, UK Head of Programs, Global Consumer Center (CONSENT) and National Coordinator for the Food Safety Coalition of Uganda Professor, Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology and Director, Center for Research in Food Environments and Nutrition-Related Chronic Diseases (CIAPEC), University of Chile Independent consultant, and Former Senior Investigator and Integrative Physiology Section Chief at the National Institutes of Health, USA Distinguished Professor and Section Head for NCDs and Mental Health, The Aga Khan University, Pakistan Assistant Professor, Division of Human Nutrition and Health, Wageningen University, Netherlands Professor of Public Health Nutrition, and Chair, Department of Population, Family & Reproductive Health, School of Public Health, University of Ghana Professor Emeritus of Nutrition and Public Health, University of São Paulo (USP), Brazil Associate professor of Public Health and Global Nutrition, Department of Nutrition, University of Montréal, Canada Associate Professor, Institute for Population and Social Research, Mahidol University, Thailand Associate Professor, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and Brigham and Women’s Hospital, USA Senior Research Director, National Institute of Health and Medical Research (Inserm), France Professor, National Institute for Nutrition and Health, Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, China Publications What are healthy diets? Joint statement by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations... Healthy diets promote health, growth and development, support active lifestyles, prevent nutrient deficiencies and excesses, communicable and noncommunicable... In current food environments, energy-dense, nutrient-poor foods are readily available, heavily marketed and relatively cheap. Consumers are challenged... Saturated fatty acid and trans-fatty acid intake for adults and children: WHO guideline This guideline provides updated, evidence-informed guidance on the intake of saturated fatty acids and trans-fatty acids to reduce the risk of diet-related... Red and processed meat in the context of health and the environment: many shades of red and green: information... There is growing international consensus that food systems transformation is important to address the challenges of malnutrition in all its forms, the... Children continue to be exposed to powerful food marketing, which predominantly promotes foods high in saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids, free sugars... Use of non-sugar sweeteners: WHO guideline This guideline provides evidence-informed guidance on the use of non-sugar sweeteners to reduce the risk of unhealthy weight gain and diet-related... Guideline: sugars intake for adults and children This guideline provides updated global, evidence-informed recommendations on the intake of free sugars to reduce the risk of NCDs in adults and children,... Guideline: sodium intake for adults and children This guideline provides updated global, evidence-informed recommendations on the consumption of sodium to reduce NCDs in most adults and children. The...