The UN Decade of Action on Nutrition is a commitment by United Nations Member States to undertake 10 years of sustained and coherent implementation of policies, programmes and increased investments to eliminate malnutrition in all its forms, everywhere, leaving no one behind. Publications The Work Programme for the Nutrition Decade is a living document developed through an inclusive, continuous and collaborative process, building upon and... The proclamation of the United Nations (UN) Decade of Action on Nutrition 2016–2025 – the Nutrition Decade – by the UN General Assembly... Action Networks are informal coalitions of countries focusing on a specific nutrition related action area to foster policy dialogue and facilitate and... All people, at all ages and at all times, should have access to affordable, diversified, safe and healthy diets. Maintaining a healthy diet throughout... Global nutrition targets 2030: topical briefs on maternal, infant and young child... This policy brief provides policy-makers, programme managers, health professionals and advocates with information and policy options related to the implementation... Food reformulation is the process of altering the processing or composition of a food or beverage product, to improve its nutritional proﬁle or to reduce... Nutrition labelling: policy brief This policy brief provides policymakers, programme managers, health professionals and advocates with information and options for nutrition labelling policies,... This policy brief provides policy-makers and programme managers, health professionals and advocates with information and policy options to increase protection... This policy brief describes the importance of integrating physical activity into primary and secondary schools so that all children and young people can... Global nutrition policy review 2016-2017: country progress in creating enabling policy environments for... The Global Nutrition Policy Review 2016–2017 is the report of the second comprehensive analysis of nutrition-related policy environment, coordination... Strengthening nutrition action: a resource guide for countries based on the policy recommendations of... The Strengthening Nutrition Action resource guide is part of the follow-up to the Second International Conference on Nutrition (ICN2) that was held in... Driving commitment for nutrition within the UN Decade of Action on Nutrition: policy brief The Nutrition Decade presents an unprecedented opportunity for accelerating country-led actions to end hunger, eliminate all forms of malnutrition, and... Events Multimedia Facts on nutrition Partners Contact Please send inquiries to: The joint FAO/WHO Secretariat of the Nutrition Decade Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00153 Rome Italy Website: https://www.un.org/nutrition/ Email: nutrition@fao.org and The joint FAO/WHO Secretariat of the Nutrition Decade World Health Organization (WHO) Avenue Appia 41 CH-1211 Geneva 27 Switzerland Email: nutrition@who.int