Working together for the good of all people, everywhere Collaboration is at the heart of all we do. Every day we connect nations, partners and experts so that we can go further, together. Our partners help support WHO’s scientific work and field programmes, contribute funding and resources, engage in our campaigns and programmes and join us in advocacy to bring policy and behaviour change for better health. Partnerships help us to deliver life-saving vaccines and supplies, raise funds for the Triple Billion Targets, establish consensus among leading scientists and much more. From world leaders to international organizations, civil society, foundations, researchers and health workers, we mobilize every part of society to achieve health and safety for all. Who we work with United Nations and multilateral organizations As the only UN agency dedicated to global health, WHO works to harness global knowledge and resources to help Member States improve health for all. Governments and leaders Every part of WHO’s work involves strong collaboration with government leaders. Political will and leadership are essential agents of change to improve the health and well-being of everyone, everywhere. Experts WHO brings together individual experts to provide scientific, technical and strategic advice on specific health issues. These experts act in a personal capacity and do not represent any external entity, authority or government. Non-State actors WHO collaborates with non-governmental and private sector organizations, philanthropic foundations, academic institutions and other non-State actors. More than 800 collaborating centres support WHO on issues such as nursing, occupational health, communicable diseases, nutrition and more. Multisectoral collaboration WHO works with various partners in multiple informal and formal cooperative arrangements to achieve the Organization's health objectives jointly. Goodwill Ambassadors, Envoys and other advocates Ambassadors are well-known personalities from the worlds of arts, literature, entertainment, sport or other fields of public life who commit to contribute to WHO's efforts to raise awareness of important health problems and solutions. The Director-General appoints Special Envoys to provide strategic advice and high-level political advocacy and engagement.